                                               Kaggriculture
           Network + Deterministic Day Compiler Design
                                           Self-contained implementation specification

                                                      Revised 21 September 2026


  Design goal
  At every dawn, a neural policy predicts a semantic one-day plan. A deterministic compiler converts it into
  purchases, biological jobs, harvests, shed returns, market orders and worker schedules. The network chooses
  the intended farm and production; the compiler finds a complete, funded execution. Routing, inventory DPs and
  economic search share one resource ledger.


This revision retains the original 20-section structure. It incorporates the game-rule audit, our worker and multiday
search work, the teammate repositories, recent public notebooks and two rounds of replay confirmation.
The existing worker solver is a useful component to extend. It returns a verified route when successful; it does not
by itself establish funding, shared shed capacity or economic optimality. A missed search does not prove the
DayPlan infeasible.
Recommended V1: direct animal targets with explicit retained groups; bundled animal service with zero-value
CARE pruning; exact crop-service alternatives; causal opponent-flow forecasts; a universal partial seller starting
with H6; a bounded search over complete return and routing candidates; wheat inventory DP and fertilizer
reservations under shared cash, capacity and order constraints.

  Strength and throughput
  Optimize the complete compiler, with an affordable incumbent and bounded heavy-tail work. Do not constrain
  the design to a guessed single-digit millisecond target. Measure decision latency and full-game training
  throughput alongside quality. Offline teacher search may spend more than ordinary rollout compilation.


The mechanics and individual mechanisms have direct tests. The full revised compiler and a gold-level agent are
not yet validated. Section 18 distinguishes tested results from proposed integration; section 20 defines the
implementation and learning sequence.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                              1
1. System boundary
The network chooses strategic commitments; the compiler chooses their execution. Current-day compilation uses
exact mechanics and a continuation score. Full-game strategic search belongs in the outer planner or offline
teacher, rather than every compiler call.

  Layer                              Owns                                          Boundary

  Neural DayPlan                     Farm composition, crop yield/harvest          Does not emit worker paths or raw market
                                     goals, FULL/LEAN/RETIRE, animal               schedules. Joint choices must be
                                     service and retention, land expansion;        consistent.
                                     optional region preferences.

  Deterministic compiler             Entity assignment, biological alternatives,   Preserves the requested production and
                                     purchase obligations, worker/return timing,   retention commitments; reports any repair
                                     trading and shared resource feasibility.      that changes them.

  Worker solver                      Worker assignment, movement, job order,       A subproblem of the complete economic
                                     cargo, shed visits, hire count and route      candidate; it may be extended or merged
                                     verification.                                 with the DPs.

  Outer planner / teacher            Alternative semantic plans, multiday          Uses legal observations for deployable
                                     continuations and policy/value                decisions; replay futures remain
                                     improvement.                                  evaluation data.


2. End-to-end control loop
  DAWN
    1. Encode legal own/public state, history and cheap exact features.
    2. Jointly decode a masked semantic DayPlan.
    3. Choose entities and generate exact biological alternatives.
    4. Build purchase obligations and a funded initial worker/return plan.
    5. Forecast coherent rival-flow scenarios and known demand events.
    6. Solve trading subproblems under the shared resource ledger.
    7. Search a bounded set of complete routing/return/service candidates.
    8. Verify the selected candidate and retain a complete incumbent.
  HOUR BY HOUR
    9. Reconcile actual state and fills; recompute market actions.
   10. Keep routes while assumptions hold; repair an affected suffix
       after a critical hire, input or return failure.
  NEXT DAWN
   11. Replan from the actual farm, resources and retained intentions.



  Bounded joint optimization
  Funding returns can be mandatory. Do not first choose a route that assumes free inputs, then treat financing as
  an optional overlay. Small DPs and worker solving may alternate inside a bounded search, but only a fully
  checked candidate can replace the incumbent. A hard iteration limit is a runtime bound, not a convergence
  guarantee.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                        2
3. Network output
Keep the output semantic and compact. It describes the intended farm and production, while dependent
purchases and material quantities are derived mechanically. Mask inconsistent choices before sampling where
possible; log both the sampled and executed plan if repair changes it.

3.1 New crops
  Output                                      Meaning

  new_wheat_count                             New wheat plants to establish today.

  new_carrot_count                            New carrot plants to establish today.

  new_melon_count                             New melon plants to establish today.

  new_tomato_count                            New tomato plants to establish today.

  new_strawberry_count                        New strawberry plants to establish today.

Counts must fit retained crops, available land, structures, seed funding and establishment WATER. Seed
purchases and clearing jobs are derived from these counts and exact placements. A legal count vector alone is
not proof that the day can be executed.

3.2 Animals: predict direct targets
Keep target_cows_next_dawn, target_sheep_next_dawn and target_geese_next_dawn. Also retain the
selected existing groups, their biological state, and which requested escapes can actually occur tonight. New and
mature animals are not interchangeable continuations.

  retained_p = current_placed_p - realizable_planned_escapes_p
  new_placements_p = target_p - retained_p
  required_purchases_p = max(0, new_placements_p - usable_unplaced_p)


Require new_placements_p >= 0. Usable unplaced animals include own shed and cargo animals that can reach
a legal placement in time. Derive structures, pickups and placement jobs jointly. Do not discard an existing mature
animal merely to satisfy an aggregate target label.

  Purchase obligations are idempotent
  Reconcile required quantities with actual fills and outstanding obligations. Repeating the same herd target must
  not create another purchase. A failed order remains pending only while its placement commitment still needs it.
  Replay requests that failed are not automatically intended extra animals.


Direct targets remain convenient imitation labels. Extract them with retained/placed groups and feasible service,
not just an isolated next-state count. A shop-based target may be an input feature; it need not define the output
label.

3.3 Land
Keep buy_next_land_today in {0,1} for V1. The observed top-player workloads support one expansion per
day. This is a representation choice, not the game's purchase limit. Support the legal fourth quadrant. Retry a
required purchase while it remains feasible and useful; a single failed hour must not silently cancel the expansion.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                              3
3.4 Existing crops
A continuation specifies the harvest/production and yield that must be preserved. The compiler chooses the
service calendar. Keep the common age menus and group count partitions, but make their promised
consequences explicit.

  Crop                                        Per semantic group output

  Wheat                                       Continuation counts for the existing age-2/3/4 procedure menu, plus retire_count.
                                              Bind each option to an explicit harvest age and minimum yield derived from
                                              current state. Compile the WATER/FERTILIZE realization.

  Carrot                                      The corresponding age-2/3 continuation counts, plus retire_count, with explicit
                                              yield commitments.

  Melon                                       Keep six yield by age 10 as the default. Allow explicit lower-yield goals from the
                                              feasible frontier, plus retire_count. A cheaper service method may preserve the
                                              same target; a lower target requires a policy choice or recorded plan revision.

  Tomato / Strawberry                         full_count, lean_count, retire_count. FULL preserves intended useful doubled
                                              production; LEAN preserves survival and its resulting base production; RETIRE
                                              stops future preservation.

For V1, the existing wheat/carrot age-by-fertilizer labels can be mapped to their resulting yield goals. They should
not force an inefficient action sequence if a different service calendar meets the same commitment. Deduplicate
equivalent options and mask goals that are no longer reachable.
Include held yield, fertilizer expiry, dry state and the remaining game horizon when defining each option. Harvest
age is a growth target; the latest safe harvest hour also depends on decay. A legal later harvest is an execution
candidate only when it preserves the chosen yield and other commitments.

3.5 Existing animals
  Output                                      Meaning

  serve_today_count                           Feed selected animals today; include CARE when it can add value under the
                                              retained production commitments. Keep one bundled strategic service output.

  allow_escape_tonight_count                  Selected animals intentionally left unfed that can actually escape tonight, given
                                              their current unfed state.

An unserved animal may survive one day without feed. Do not equate every skipped service with an immediate
escape. The target, service and escape partitions must be consistent with the exact biological transition.

  Bundled policy output, separate compiler jobs
  FEED and CARE remain separate jobs internally. Remove CARE before routing when its bonus cannot reach a
  useful production or is provably redundant at the cap. Otherwise keep the requested service. Do not silently
  sacrifice a promised bonus merely because CARE uses one action, and do not remove it after executor
  bookkeeping has already assumed it will run.


The compiler chooses physical members with their geometry and future state in view. It does not move today's
required feeding to another day to smooth labor. Future service intentions are provisional and are reconsidered at
the next dawn.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                            4
4. Network input
Use a compact spatial/entity encoding plus semantic summaries. Keep exact coordinates and biological state;
distance averages alone hide placement and routing constraints. Add compiler features when they are cheap,
causal and demonstrably useful.

4.1 Own farm
• Crops: type, age, held yield, dry/water state, fertilizer expiry, production phase, decay deadline and coordinates.
• Animals: type, age/production phase, unfed state, care bank, held product, fertilizer availability, structure and
   coordinates.
• Own cash, land, empty tiles, structures, workers/positions, shed quantities and capacity, seeds and each worker's
   cargo.
• Pending asset and production commitments, actual fills, remaining jobs and recent compiler repairs.

4.2 Visible opponent farm
• Public crops, animals, land, structures, money and worker positions, with causal changes over time.
• Inferred harvest/return and net-market-flow features from observable changes.
• Bounded or probabilistic hidden-stock estimates. Do not insert the rival's private shed or replay command list into
   live inputs.

4.3 Global market and shop state
• Current market inventory, exact marginal prices, revealed shops and known future consumption ticks.
• Time to relevant recovery, receipt, capacity, purchase and terminal events.
• Own executed trades and inferred rival flow. The observation does not expose the rival's submitted orders or their
   exact accepted quantities.

4.4 Downstream-value features
  Feature family                              Useful examples

  Biology                                     Exact yield and survival consequences; feasible service frontiers; pending care
                                              value; true terminal deadlines.

  Finished products                           Sell-now curves, forecast supply, known demand, candidate receipt timing and
                                              calibrated timing value.

  Wheat / fertilizer                          Usable shed/cargo supply, committed pickups and direct transfers, near-term
                                              deficits and surplus opportunities.

  Routing / placement                         Exact coordinates, cheap route insertion cost, workload peaks, hire thresholds
                                              and shared-trip opportunities.

  Cash / capacity                             Prefix spending and funding needs, shed occupancy before worker deposits, tile
                                              and order-slot constraints.

Distinguish state features from candidate-dependent values: a return value or cash floor computed for one
proposed route is not unconditional truth. Start with exact cheap facts; add expensive forecasts or derived
features through downstream ablation.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                         5
5. Deterministic day compiler: inputs and outputs
5.1 Worker solver and shared ledger
The worker solver receives exact jobs and logistics. Extend or merge it with inventory and economic search as
needed. Its current measured coverage applies to an eligible workload subset; a 13-hire implementation cap is not
a game rule or a strategic optimum.

  WorkerSolveInput {
    biological_jobs / legal_calendar_alternatives
    exact_placement_targets
    cumulative_worker_return_requirements // product, quantity, deadline
    pickup_and_material_dependencies
    hire_and_purchase_constraints
  }
  WorkerSolveOutput {
    actions[hours], hires, exact_hire_cost
    worker_deposits, pickups, cargo_by_event
    completed_jobs, resulting_biology, route_slack
    verified_route_or_search_failure
  }


A return requirement means cumulative worker deposits, excluding initial stock and market buys. Minimum
available shed stock is a different constraint enforced by the ledger. Today's horizon is normally 24 actions; day
29 has 23.

  CompleteCandidate {
    semantic_commitments, chosen_entities_and_calendars
    worker_schedule, ordered_market_choices
    shed / cargo / seed / cash ledger at every subevent
    scenario_feasibility, resulting_farm_and_belief, score
  }


The ledger follows actual engine order: farmer, then hired workers; market list positions with simultaneous item
quotes; demand and decay; night settlement when it exists. Enforce nonnegative resources, shared shed capacity
and seed-demand rules at those phases.

5.2 Compiler output
• Exact entities, placements, biological jobs and selected calendar alternatives.
• Worker schedule, cumulative receipts and material/purchase obligations.
• Current legal market actions and conditional trading rules under shared constraints.
• A fully checked incumbent, scenario assumptions and bounded repair triggers.
• Actual wages, resource bottlenecks, next-state consequences and explicit plan revisions for training/debugging.

  Feasibility is a complete-candidate property
  A route may be valid while its hires or inputs are unfunded. Exact verification applies to our mechanics under a
  specified rival scenario; it cannot guarantee unknown future prices. Keep a feasible fallback and reconcile actual
  outcomes during execution.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                6
6. Choose concrete entities and tiles
Map semantic counts to physical members deterministically, while preserving continuation-relevant differences.
Counts alone do not make two tile assignments equally valuable.
1. Start with short insertions into existing routes, compact work and low conflict with required placements.
2. Compare the exact hire bill, input logistics and future service burden, not distance alone.
3. Try member swaps and placements that preserve the requested state but improve current or future work. Keep
   region preferences from the policy when useful.
4. RETIRE does not require DIG immediately. Harvest or clear only when value, reuse or a commitment requires it;
   escaped animals leave structures.
5. Reserve useful near-shed sites for assets with repeated logistics. Account for hire spawning and the opportunity
   cost of permanent animal placements.

7. Expand DayPlan intent into biological tile jobs
7.1 One-shot crops
Generate a small exact frontier over survival, active fertilizer duration, held yield, harvest age and service cost.
New crops must be watered on planting day. FERTILIZE must precede a yield-bearing WATER when its extra
yield is required. Include decay at the actual hour and truncate at the true terminal turn.

  Biology state: age, dry state, fertilizer expiry, held yield
  Choice: legal WATER / FERTILIZE / HARVEST calendar
  Keep: nondominated yield, water count, fertilizer use,
        and distinct calendars relevant to route feasibility
  Require: selected harvest/yield promise and survival until harvest


The biological frontier is not yet a routing frontier. Two calendars with equal action counts may need different hires
or share different trips. Keep a few useful calendar alternatives or pass the legal alternatives into worker solving;
use latest timing as a candidate, not a proof of minimum cost.

7.2 Melon
Keep six yield by age 10 as the default. Compare fertilizer and watering alternatives even when both reach the
cap. For a new melon, exact mechanics give these useful choices:

  Yield at age 10                             WATER actions               Fertilizer units / FERTILIZE actions

  3/4/5                                       5/6/7                       0

  5                                           5                           1

  6                                           8                           0

  6                                           6                           1

Fertilizer can save two WATER actions while adding one FERTILIZE action and its supply cost. The joint compiler
compares the actual route, wage and material consequences. It may change the service method while preserving
yield; lowering the yield goal is an explicit strategic change.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                7
7.3 Tomato and strawberry: FULL / LEAN / RETIRE
  Mode                                        Deterministic meaning

  RETIRE                                      No future-preservation service. Harvest remaining value or clear for reuse when
                                              worthwhile or required.

  LEAN                                        Preserve survival with required WATER. Do not add fertilizer solely for a bonus.
                                              Existing fertilizer and base production still count.

  FULL                                        Preserve intended useful doubled productions. WATER on each preparation day,
                                              with fertilizer active then; add survival water as needed.

For production available on day P, preparation is day P-1. If fertilizer is not already active then, an application on
P-3, P-2 or P-1 can cover it. Optimize coverage across all intended productions in the provisional calendar, not as
independent windows.

  For each required FULL production:
    WATER on its preparation day
    fertilizer active on that day
  Track shared three-day fertilizer coverage across productions.
  If the yield commitment would clip at the held cap:
    add a timely harvest or revise that commitment explicitly.


Strawberry preparation ages 9, 11, 13 and 15 can use two fertilizer applications, at ages 9 and 13. Moving the first
to age 8 can require three in total. Recompute future service cost when shifting an application. Only today's work
is committed; replan provisional future service at the next dawn.

7.4 Flexible service scheduler
Keep a small set of calendar alternatives with their full water, fertilizer, survival and output consequences. Screen
them by route insertion and workload peaks, then compare exact hire/resource cost. Avoid an arbitrary early-work
penalty that outweighs a real wage saving. A greedy window assignment is a warm start, not the final coupled
optimum.

7.5 Animal service
FEED and useful CARE are flexible within the chosen day and can share a visit with HARVEST or fertilizer
collection. Care earned today is banked after tonight's production and affects a later scheduled production only if
the animal is fed on that production day.
Prune care before routing when its first usable bonus would arrive after the game, or the existing bank already
saturates that production after accounting for any bank clearing tonight. A currently full producer alone is not
enough: a later harvest may free room. Preserve nonzero promised care benefits.
Collect fertilizer when its sale/use value exceeds the actual added wage, displaced work and logistics cost. An
extra hire is allowed when profitable; unchanged worker count is not a mandatory condition.

  Terminal mechanics
  The final action is step 718, day 29 hour 22. There is no playable hour 23 and no final automatic night deposit.
  Plan actual returns and sales by that turn. Remove terminal service only when it cannot affect useful current
  output or another retained commitment.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                          8
8. Preliminary solve and purchase deadlines
Build the first complete funded candidate, including early returns needed to pay for mandatory work. This can use
the worker solver and small inventory DPs iteratively; it must not assume that inputs and hires are already paid
for.
1. Generate required biological/placement jobs, input dependencies and purchase obligations.
2. Propose worker routes and required funding returns together. Derive the last market phase before each
   dependent pickup, planting or placement.
3. Check cash and materials through every order/worker prefix. Add funding sales/returns or choose a different
   complete route when necessary.
4. Supply those constraints to the trading subproblems. Recompute them whenever a route, hire count, purchase or
   return changes.

  cash_after(t) = initial_cash
                + cumulative_executable_sale_receipts(t)
                - cumulative_required_spending(t)
  require cash_after(t) >= 0 at every subevent


Use scenario-specific executable quotes. A fixed cash target, including the prototype's $5,000 target, is not a
proof of funding. Preserve a complete incumbent while bounded search improves it; report failure rather than
executing a route with unsupported assumptions.

9. Opponent market-flow forecast
Forecast uncertain market supply and timing using legal public observations and own history. Use a shared
implementation with product-specific calibration where useful. The GBDT fitted on September 12 replays is a
tested baseline; compare it with simple causal models by downstream decision value as well as prediction error.

  Known or observed                           Inferred or forecast

  Current market inventory/prices;            Rival hidden stock, net buys/sales and likely near-term supply.
  own stock and actions.

  Revealed shops and their future             Unrevealed shops remain uncertain, not replay inputs.
  ticks; town demand.

  Public farms, money and                     Harvest/return timing and order-position competition.
  worker-position changes.


  OpponentFlowForecast {
    product, event_times
    coherent_scenarios[] // quantities and timing along each trajectory
    scenario_weights / calibrated uncertainty
  }


Keep cumulative sales and buys separately nonnegative and time-consistent; net flow may be negative.
Independent quantiles at several horizons do not define a joint trajectory. Use episode-, submission-family- and
time-separated evaluation; exclude opposite seats of an episode from other splits. Raw replay commands and
private state may label offline targets, but must not enter live features.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                            9
10. Finished-product seller: rolling partial-sale DP
Use one exact seller implementation for carrot, tomato, strawberry, melon, egg, milk and wool. Start with H6;
retain H3 as a cheaper alternative. H6 means six known future demand-recovery events, not six turns. Include
scheduled receipts, pickups, capacity and funding deadlines as additional events even when demand does not
recover there.
For a per-product subproblem, condition the state and feasible actions on the common resource ledger and
current belief. Products share cash, shed capacity and up to ten order slots; independent optima must be joined
and checked.

  State: event k, available quantity q, market inventory I,
         shared-resource constraints and current belief
  Action: integer sale x, 0 <= x <= q
  For each coherent rival scenario:
    (own_cash, rival_cash, q_next, I_next, ledger_next) =
      exact_stage(state, x, planned_flows, rival_path, demand)
  V = max_legal_x E[own_cash - lambda * rival_cash
                   + V_next(q_next, I_next, ledger_next, belief_next)]


The stage advances worker flows, order slots and demand ticks in actual order through the next event. Do not
subtract aggregate demand after trades that should have occurred after a recovery.
Use lambda=1 as the tested margin-aware starting objective. Both item quotes are computed before either
simultaneous trade changes inventory. Include list positions, per-unit repricing, rounding, actual fills and the
$1-floor transition. A sale at the floor does not increase market inventory.
Subtract total rival stage cash or an effect relative to a fixed reference, with consistent accounting. Do not subtract
that same effect again in the continuation value. At the strategic boundary, use either dollar margin plus additional
future margin, or win-value directly; never mix units or count current money twice.

10.1 Horizon and residual value
At an artificial horizon, value residual inventory together with future output, liquidity and commitments. It is neither
automatically worthless nor identical across competing return plans. A receding forced-liquidation horizon can
keep moving away; a seller with no liquidation pressure can defer too much.
The tested prototype used a $0.25/item/hour holding penalty, a cash target and actual capacity checks. These are
baseline settings to compare with a calibrated residual value, not universal economic constants. At the actual
terminal state, unsold inventory and cargo have zero value.

  Evidence boundary
  The positive H6 replay result used current-stock DP, reactive receipts and next-DROP space reservation. It did
  not implement the complete future-receipt/shared-budget DP specified here. Adopt H6 as the starting candidate;
  do not claim the full recurrence or horizon is already proven optimal.



10.2 Rolling execution
Commit only the current action. Update from real market and own state next turn. Use delay regret to propose
sale ordering, then check the complete order list against funding, capacity and simultaneous rival timing. Reserve
space before a worker DROP; selling later that hour cannot undo destroyed overflow.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                               10
11. Shed-return and optional-harvest scheduler
Keep the small return frontier and exact worker solver. Change the value being optimized: compare complete
feasible continuations conditional on the returns already selected.

  G(candidate | selected_returns) =
      Q(best_complete_continuation_with_candidate)
    - Q(best_complete_continuation_without_candidate)


The original same-asset early-availability difference remains a useful cheap screen only when both alternatives
preserve the asset and all relevant future work. Do not cancel continuation value when wages, clipping, shed loss,
input reuse, future stock or funding changes.

11.1 Candidate deadlines
• Before a required hire/input/land purchase, or another DayPlan funding deadline.
• Before worker deposits would overflow, output would decay/clip, or terminal sale becomes impossible.
• Before/after known demand recovery, or a plausible rival supply event.
• At shared-trip or route-completion boundaries that make several returns cheaper together.

11.2 Which products get harvested
One-shot harvest follows its chosen age/yield commitment. Animal and ongoing-crop harvests are candidates for
sale access, retained production or terminal value. Avoiding every clipped unit is not mandatory unless the plan
explicitly preserves it; compare the extra wage against the saved value.
Group nearby producers into return atoms: individual tiles, nearest 2/4/all, and useful shared-route batches. The
nearest-distance menu is a warm start, not the only allowed geometry. Each atom carries product, quantity,
dependencies, feasible deadlines and a cheap insertion estimate.

11.3 Bounded Pareto search with exact evaluation

  Start: complete funded incumbent, including mandatory returns
  Generate: service/harvest/return/placement alternatives
  Screen: legality, cheap route bounds and conditional value estimates
  Exact-evaluate: routes + trading + shared ledger + next-state value
  Keep: best complete candidate and useful nondominated alternatives
  Stop: expansion/time budget; return the checked incumbent


Use the exact nonlinear hire bill. Count additional purchases, route sharing, inventory and future farm state. Route
slack can break ties or model execution risk, but do not invent a large dollar price for every step. Dominance is
valid only for labels with compatible required work and continuation-relevant state.

  Return scoring must improve beyond one-day liquidation
  Coupled route/seller tests found that even successful biological and resource checks could select a poor
  prescribed continuation. Extra zero/mean/double-flow gates did not fix that ranking reliably. Use a calibrated
  next-state value or short responsive continuation; do not promote the tested naive liquidation score. Fixed
  replay suffix losses are diagnostics, not proof of what an adaptive agent would do.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                            11
12. Wheat: rolling inventory-control DP
Wheat is an input, produced crop and tradable stock. Retain buy/sell/hold and same-day direction changes. The
network chooses the herd, feeding and crop goals; the compiler derives the inventory operations that execute
them.

12.1 Event timeline
• Exact wheat pickups and feed dependencies, plus usable carried supply.
• Planned harvests, worker returns and any direct transfers.
• Current market inventory, revealed demand and causal rival net-flow scenarios.
• Cash and shared-capacity constraints from other purchases and returns.

12.2 DP and exact reduction

  State: event, wheat quantity, market inventory,
         required shared-resource labels
  Action: legal buy / sell / hold quantity
  Hard: every planned pickup has material at its actual worker phase
  Hard: required purchases and hires remain funded; shed/slots fit
  Value: exact trading cash + conditional continuation inventory value


Away from the $1 price plateau, with external flow between our trading stages and no rival trade during our
quantity order, conservation gives a smaller subproblem:

  I_h + q_h = A_h
  F_h(q) = sum(j=1..q) price(A_h - j)
  cash from changing stock q to z = F_h(q) - F_h(z)


This gives O(HQ) work for the isolated fixed-flow stock problem using quantity-only transitions and prefix extrema.
Use the general exact transition at the price floor or with simultaneous rival trading. Shared cash/capacity can
require additional labels; the reduction does not remove those constraints.
The identity matched 8,649 solo engine transactions; 200 small DP cases matched exhaustive search. A
buy/resell round trip without intervening events earns zero. Those checks validate arithmetic, not an independent
financially unconstrained wheat policy.

12.3 Next-dawn terminal value
Estimate a joint distribution of next-day requirements and prices from the intended herd, service, biological state
and legal history. Let U_s(q) be projected usable supply after unsettled cargo/receipts and other reserved uses,
without double counting. A starting approximation is:

  TV(q, state) = E_s[
      sell_value_s(max(0, U_s(q) - R_s))
    - buy_cost_s(max(0, R_s - U_s(q))) ]


Evaluate nonlinear costs inside the expectation at the corresponding market state, with liquidity and capacity
constraints. Do not replace this with a universal herd-count reserve or a fixed buffer. Actual next-day buys can
occur at different times; validate the approximation by its complete continuation. At true game end, unsold wheat
has zero value and no next-dawn feed requirement.
Do not add a raw wheat-sale head. If long-horizon bias persists, prefer a small policy adjustment to the inventory
goal or continuation value, while the compiler still handles exact flows and funding.



Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                           12
13. Fertilizer: rule-based inventory controller
Keep a cheap controller as the V1 candidate generator. Fertilizer has no town/shop recovery, but shares cash and
capacity with the rest of the farm. Collections can feed crops directly from worker cargo without visiting the shed.
1. Derive fertilizer requirements before each FERTILIZE and PICKUP dependency, including direct carried supply.
2. Add only collections and returns that can reach the required worker/location in time.
3. Buy the remaining shortfall before its dependent worker phase, subject to funding and order capacity.
4. Consider early sales of safe surplus as well as waiting. No general rule prefers the final collection of the day.
5. Derive any next-day reserve from the provisional crop calendar and continuation value. Do not freeze an arbitrary
   zero/four/eight-unit buffer.
6. Preserve committed crop output first. Rank optional fertilizer uses by incremental net value and actual added
   work, not a universal species priority.
A profitable mean surplus rule can still miss required pickups. The shared ledger and full candidate check must
reject or repair those failures. Speculative buy/resell is not a default; an unchanged-market round trip is not free
profit.

14. Other purchases and the hourly market-order scheduler
14.1 Seeds, animals and land
Buy at the latest feasible market phase before use, allowing earlier purchase for capacity, funding or slot reasons.
Reconcile outstanding commitments with actual fills. Do not reproduce failed speculative replay requests as
additional intended purchases. Seeds bought this turn become usable next turn; same-crop simultaneous PLANT
demand must fit the available seeds, including requests on invalid tiles.

14.2 Structures and clearing
Use existing legal structures and animals before buying/building more. Clear only enough retained/retired space
to support selected placements or profitable reuse. Include HARVEST, DIG/BUILD, delivery, PLACE/PLANT and
required WATER as a complete dependency chain.

14.3 Legal market order sequence each hour
  Priority for candidate                      Required check
  generation

  Funding and dependent                       Place funding sells early enough for each dependent order; enforce exact prices,
  purchases                                   materials and all preceding costs.

  Capacity release                            Free space before the relevant worker deposit or purchase. Respect partial
                                              PLACE versus destructive DROP.

  High delay regret                           Compare rival order timing and demand events; recompute after combining
                                              products.

  Ordinary surplus / patient sales            Fit remaining slots without violating commitments; waiting remains a legal choice.

Compute executable own sale quantities sequentially. Filling genuinely dead sale slots is a useful small
candidate; blanket repacking of all purchases is not a safe default. Simulate the proposed list, including
simultaneous quotes, rather than relying on a greedy priority sort alone.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                        13
15. Final solve, verification and bounded repair
1. Take a complete candidate: exact entities, calendar, route, returns, purchases and conditional market choices.
2. Recompute dependent input and trading schedules when exact worker timings change.
3. Verify each intended worker job, seed demand, purchase, prefix cash balance, cargo/shed flow, capacity limit and
   terminal return under the specified scenarios.
4. Preserve the best fully checked incumbent. If a candidate fails, repair the affected dependencies within budget or
   discard it.

15.1 Repair by dependency and loss
There is no universal fixed order of deletions. A return may fund required work; a fertilizer collection may supply a
committed crop. Identify the failed constraint and retain its dependency chain.
• Reorder or resize optional trades, choose a funding return, or change a safe input-purchase time.
• Move service within a legal calendar, share a route, swap physical members or change legal placements while
   preserving the intended output and retained farm.
• Remove an optional return, collection or convenience only when its dependent benefits are genuinely optional and
   the complete candidate improves.
• If the semantic plan cannot be supported, request a revised plan from the policy/outer planner. Record any
    executed violation explicitly and keep a legal fallback.
Scenario verification is exact for the modeled sequence, not a guarantee about unknown rival actions. Repairs
must remain available when an actual price or fill differs.

16. Hourly reactive execution
Keep the chosen worker schedule while its input, hire and capacity assumptions hold. Reconcile actual state
before generating the next actions.

  Component                                   Hourly behavior

  Finished-product seller                     Use real shed/market state, causal history and remaining planned receipts.
                                              Commit the current sale only.

  Wheat DP                                    Recompute buy/sell/hold under remaining pickups, cash obligations, cargo and
                                              capacity.

  Fertilizer controller                       Update time-specific deficits/surplus from actual stock, usable collections and
                                              committed crop jobs.

  Asset purchases                             Reconcile remaining quantities and deadlines; retry only still-needed obligations.

  Market allocator                            Join candidates into a checked legal list; update funding/capacity dependencies.

  Worker execution                            Execute the route normally; trigger bounded suffix repair after a critical missed
                                              hire, input or deposit.


  Do not keep executing an invalid route
  A hire is available next turn, not retroactively. A missed hire changes worker indices and downstream work; a
  missing input can invalidate a whole service chain. Repair only when assumptions fail, rather than solving
  routes gratuitously every hour. Pruned jobs must already be reflected in executor completion state.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                            14
17. Runtime design
Keep all online searches anytime and bounded. Strength is the objective; latency and rollout throughput
determine how much search is practical.
• Use fixed contiguous state, reusable scratch buffers and direct typed engine calls.
• Cache exact biological frontiers, price kernels and unchanged route subproblems; include all relevant inputs in
   cache keys.
• Generate event-based deadlines and skip impossible/forced choices. Batch cheap scoring before exact route and
   scenario work.
• Retain a complete incumbent before expensive work. Use deterministic expansion limits for comparisons and
   soft/hard deadlines for deployment.
• Spend more work on high-value or uncertain decisions; stop heavy tails safely. Allow bounded hourly repair when
   a critical assumption fails.
• Report p50/p95/p99/max complete-decision latency, coverage, fallback/timeout rate and full-game throughput,
   together with quality.
The existing eligible worker benchmark reported 98% coverage and 3.62 ms mean. A coupled return prototype
measured 97 ms mean, 213 ms p95 and 324 ms maximum on 68 accepted ordinary development days, excluding
full replay-suffix scoring. These are different workloads, not a latency guarantee. Offline teacher improvement
should spend more than routine rollout compilation.

18. Evidence that shaped the design
  Tested finding                                                             Design consequence

  New top-ten holdout: 80 perspectives / 68 episodes. H6 plus next-DROP      Use as the seller baseline. This was a
  reservation gains $1,317 mean margin, 95% interval +$629 to +$2,083;       reduced current-stock prototype, not the
  54 improve, 26 worsen.                                                     full shared-budget/receipt DP.

  On 2,312 tested dawns: 68.9% equal or better margin; 80.6% within $50      Retain leader-workload decision
  or better. Mean advantage +$45.58, interval +$21.80 to +$72.06.            advantage as a primary diagnostic.
                                                                             These are not match win rates.

  First test: 2,349 care commands removed with identical terminal cash.      Keep bundled service; prune
  New top-ten routing test: 979 care jobs removed, three days save $563 in   proven-zero care before routing. Most
  wages.                                                                     saved actions do not change hire count.

  One-shot and ongoing calendar checks match the engine;                     Use exact small biological and
  simultaneous-sale and wheat-potential checks pass.                         transaction DPs; count-only optima still
                                                                             need routing.

  Coupled return selectors and isolated input rules still fail               Improve continuation value and enforce
  complete-continuation checks in some cohorts.                              shared resources; do not infer success
                                                                             from local DP or route validity.

Replay purchases are normalized to the originally completed non-output workload so extra cash cannot unlock
failed retries. Those quantities define a supplied compiler task, not live forecast features. The cow-purchase
collapse was primarily a replay artifact. Decisions use legal observations and own supplied plans; future rival
commands/shops enter evaluation only. The second holdout was frozen after repairs, with episode-clustered
intervals. Existing local agents remain responsive diagnostics, not gold-level evidence.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                 15
19. Implementation contracts to freeze
Freeze exact mechanics and resource semantics first. Keep the strategic menus, model capacity, horizon and
search budget configurable until their downstream tests justify a choice.

  LegalObservation + History -> StateFeatures / RivalBelief
  DayPlan + State -> RetainedGroups / Placements / PurchaseObligations
  DayPlan + Biology -> ServiceCalendarAlternatives
  WorkerSolver(Jobs, Placements, Returns, Inputs) -> RouteCandidate
  PhaseLedger(Route, Orders, Scenario) -> Feasibility / ResultingState
  OpponentForecast(Observation, History, Events) -> CoherentScenarios
  SellerDP(Stock, Receipts, Forecast, SharedConstraints) -> TradeChoices
  WheatDP(Flows, Forecast, SharedConstraints, TV) -> TradeChoices
  FertilizerRule(Uses, Collections, SharedConstraints) -> TradeChoices
  JointCandidateSearch -> CheckedIncumbent / Alternatives / Diagnostics
  HourlyExecutor(ActualState, Commitments) -> Actions / RepairTrigger
  TrainingTrace -> SampledPlan / ExecutedPlan / Repairs / Outcome


Every returned candidate must state what it assumes and which commitments it completes. Keep cumulative
worker returns distinct from shed inventory. Preserve exact order phases, separate seeds from shed capacity,
and keep the true terminal horizon in every component.

20. Recommended V1 freeze
  Area                                        V1 choice

  Animal output                               Direct species targets with retained groups, realizable escapes and idempotent
                                              purchases.

  Crop output                                 Preserve common age menus; attach explicit yield goals. Default melon
                                              six-by-ten; allow explicit alternatives. Keep FULL/LEAN/RETIRE.

  Animal service                              Bundled service; separate FEED/CARE jobs with proven-zero care pruning
                                              before routing.

  Crop service                                Exact small biological frontiers and joint fertilizer coverage; compare
                                              route-relevant calendars.

  Finished products                           Causal forecast plus one partial-sale implementation; H6 baseline, H3
                                              alternative, exact shared ledger.

  Returns / harvest                           Bounded search over complete candidates with exact routes and a calibrated
                                              continuation score.

  Wheat / fertilizer                          Inventory DP and time-specific reserve/surplus candidates under shared cash,
                                              capacity and slots.

  Execution                                   Reactive market decisions; normally fixed routes with bounded repair when
                                              critical assumptions fail.

  Performance                                 Complete incumbent, deterministic budgets, bounded heavy tails and measured
                                              quality/throughput tradeoff.




Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                        16
20.1 Development and learning pipeline
Preserve the semantic-policy/compiler hierarchy throughout training. The next steps develop and validate the
agent around that interface, rather than treating the compiler specification as the whole pipeline.

  Stage                                       Deliverable and promotion check

  1. Complete execution                       Joint ledger, biological alternatives, worker solver and market candidates. Exact
                                              engine parity and completed funded commitments, including terminal and
                                              high-hire cases.

  2. Semantic imitation                       Coherent labels from top players, separated by submission and strategy family.
                                              Derive dependent purchases/materials; evaluate complete generated rollouts,
                                              not token accuracy.

  3. Our search improves our                  Warm-start multiday search from our policy and compiler. Improve feasible
  states                                      continuations on states we actually reach; train policy and next-state value on
                                              those improvements.

  4. Outcome-based learning                   Fine-tune complete-game outcomes with a separate learner and protected
                                              champion, old opponents and targeted weakness tests. Monitor joint action
                                              probabilities/KL and forgetting.

  5. Independent promotion                    Use unused episodes, time-forward and family-separated tests, plus responsive
                                              opponents. Keep some opponents unanalyzed until final evaluation. Retuning
                                              consumes a confirmation set.

Use win/draw/loss for the ultimate objective. A dollar-margin surrogate can guide search, but arbitrary cash
bonuses need not preserve expected win rate. If using potential-based shaping, use a consistent discount and
terminal potential zero; record compiler repairs in learning traces.
Our existing worker and multiday search work make this hybrid practical. JJ's latest work supports separating
learning from champion promotion; Giovanni's order/time work and our BC failures support coordinated decoding
and complete execution. Similar competitions provide successful planning, RL and imitation examples, rather than
one universally winning architecture.

  Final principle
  The network chooses decisions whose value depends on the future farm. The compiler uses exact mechanics,
  joint logistics and short-horizon market arithmetic to realize them. When a local choice changes future resources
  or production, carry that resulting state into the value comparison. Keep the interface compact without hiding
  consequential differences.



Evidence and implementation references
• Detailed tests, raw results and scope: work/sep21_compiler_tests/EMPIRICAL_REDESIGN.md.
• Frozen corrected protocol and hashes: work/sep21_compiler_tests/v2/PROTOCOL.md and v2/FROZEN.json.
• Original section-by-section audit, own research, teammates and primary competition sources:
   work/sep21_design_review/REVIEW.md.
• Latest 100 public notebooks and source links: public_knowledge/sep21_design_findings.md.
• Rules and implementation boundary: prompts/game_rules.md and prompts/local_agent.md.
Public replay logic and notebook policy blocks are evidence to learn from, not schedules to copy. Keep oracle
information out of decisions, and distinguish fixed-workload counterfactuals, responsive diagnostics and actual
competitive strength.



Kaggriculture deterministic compiler design | Revised 21 September 2026                                                           17
