BC: richer day intent and a smaller compiler
Independent design note from Codex, 2026-09-30, 18:52 UTC

Requested by Pavel as a separate contribution to the BC session. This is a
proposal, not an implemented or tested agent. No BC code, models, active logs,
training jobs or submissions were changed. Read alongside findings/bc.md.

UPDATE 18:56 UTC: BC's new design is now available. See the appended REVIEW 2
first: delivery-label semantics and the initial extractor need attention before
training. A separate small v2 network and fixed placement rule are a sensible
faster first version; the review adapts this proposal to that actual design.
UPDATE 18:59 UTC: six isolated engine checks confirm the delivery phase,
overflow, partial-deposit and terminal cases. Evidence is at the end of REVIEW 2.
UPDATE 19:05 UTC: REVIEW 3 has measured label-range failures: wave-1 cap 8
excludes 43.5% of the audited rows (27.0% on days 3-9). Also distinguish
protecting requested feed from enabling the rejected keepfed policy override.
UPDATE 19:12 UTC: read REVIEW 4 first. The first src_v2 router has reproducible
deadline, courier-order, post-rewrite feasibility and late-spawn failures, plus
an ASan-confirmed buffer overflow. Fixtures and a frozen source snapshot are in
work/sep30_intent_review/. These are executor defects, not economic results.
UPDATE 19:22 UTC: REVIEW 5 independently reconstructs 12 permitted teacher
replays with 8,628 exact phase/state checks. Opening labels agree in this
sample; later-day quantities do not. The actual early wool/milk curves below
give a more useful target than h6 alone. Pavel requested 10 hours of support
and a whole-design review every 20 minutes; checkpoint log is
work/sep30_intent_review/design_checkpoints.txt.
UPDATE 19:27 UTC: REVIEW 6 confirms understated future hire costs against the
engine (8+1 hires budgeted as 55, actually 88; 9+1 as 89, actually 143). This
is an existing funding-ledger bug, not proof that the opening table helps.
Claude's negative opening-script results support stopping that combined arm;
my next design review will focus on whether the dawn-seller pivot is sound.
UPDATE 19:34 UTC: REVIEW 7 checks the seller pivot. Moving a sale from h21 to
h0 can leave an identical engine state; crossing the h0 demand tick is a
different intervention. BC reports a 22:30 BST bundle deadline: keep the failed
opening-script keys out; treat the hire-cost patch as a separate unpromoted
candidate. Its complete compiler source passes a syntax check, and its helper
passes sanitizer tests, but it has no full-game payoff read.
UPDATE 19:43 UTC: REVIEW 8 verifies BC's new wheat counters. In the same 12
permitted games, days 10-28 wheat harvest is understated by 24.9 units/game
and feed overstated by 4.2. Planting counts match in this sample. Count accepted
FEED / PLANT actions and use the produced counter for total harvested wheat.
UPDATE 19:48 UTC: REVIEW 9 audits the new hybrid opponent bed. It is useful
sensitivity evidence, but its loan test can pass with a failed recorded
purchase, and the reactive seller stops on day 29. A synthetic engine case
proves the first failure; frequency and score impact in the 48 games are
unmeasured. Do not call the m19 causal explanation settled yet.

RECOMMENDATION

Make the learned policy choose the day's work, its timing, placement claims,
crew waves and what to sacrifice when money is short. Make the compiler assign
real workers and emit legal actions for those choices. Keep a reactive seller
as a separate component, sharing the same inventory and funding ledger.

The most useful new output is a work package with a completion condition:
"collect this sheep's wool and make it sellable by h5; return before doing
another job." A count of collections, an early-harvest score, or a wool price
bonus does not express that requirement. Nor does a return deadline by itself
protect the feeding needed to produce tomorrow's milk.

Start with a small extension of the current network and decoder. Do not make
the first version a network emitting 24 hours of raw worker actions. Worker
IDs and equivalent paths create unnecessary labels; future prices and fills
are not known at dawn. The useful split is economic choices in the intent,
mechanical execution in the compiler, and observed-market adaptation in the
seller and a small repair policy.

WHY THESE PARTICULAR OUTPUTS

1. Current DayIntent contains daily counts, service options, land and reserves,
   plus trim_order/drop_loss. It does not contain deposit deadlines, crew waves
   or ordered site claims. Current designs/day_compiler.md explicitly assigns
   long-term economic optimization and these choices to the compiler. The new
   design must change that contract, not merely add optional hints that the
   old optimizer can override.

2. BC's 650-game placement audit found nearly identical nearest-free geometry
   in both agents. The claim order differs. On day 0 M&M gives ring 0 to a cow,
   ring 1 to two sheep, and ring 2 to a sheep and cow; ours gives one ring-1
   pasture to the second cow. Later, M&M places pasture animals before geese.
   Predict the sequence of claims before learning an expensive spatial search.
   Placement is persistent: evaluate its later milk consequences too.

3. Our 24-world days-3-9 action audit found wool by h5 of 20.00 for M&M versus
   8.25 for our package, but milk of 6.00 versus 11.25. These quantities are
   summed across that seven-day window per game, not daily targets. M&M returned
   98.9% of wool directly; our collectors always collected fertilizer first.
   M&M normally collected that fertilizer later, often with a different worker.
   Feed/care were already separate in our routes. The new contract should
   distinguish product delivery from fertilizer collection, and learn a balanced
   product schedule rather than maximize all early wool.

4. A private diagnostic found a day-7 plan requesting 9 hires but receiving 7.
   Two cows with five banked bonuses each missed feed and produced one milk
   each instead of six. This establishes the shortfall and missing feed, not
   the exact failed-order cause. Current m14 already has hirecheck/latehire;
   preserve those protections. A redesign must never mark a job covered solely
   because a requested worker would have covered it.

5. Corrected wool+milk teleport diagnostics on 24 fixed worlds gave +$1,873
   margin (SE $695), +$3,149 with one extra action (SE $604), and +$805 with two
   (SE $862). All are counterfactual, NOT legal agent gains. The separate legal
   balanced-placement candidate lost $484 (SE $517) over 96 pairs, despite
   earning $1,976 more itself: its opponent earned $2,461 more. Earlier receipts
   are an intermediate target; full-game margin decides whether they help.

MINIMUM DAYINTENT V2

Retain the existing counts/options as the aggregate decision. Add four small
parts, decoded in dependency order and checked against that aggregate:

A. Ordered new-entity claims
   Each item names the species/crop, a relative site preference or chosen tile,
   a placement window, and dependencies such as land purchase or clearing.
   Initially use nearest legal free site in claim order, since BC has evidence
   for it. Reserve a site once claimed. Support provisional sites in today's
   intended quadrant; activate them only after the land purchase succeeds.
   This allows same-day planting without pretending the land is already owned.

B. Work packages
   Each has a stable target, service/action bundle, release condition, completion
   window, priority tier, and allowed simplifications. Existing targets use
   physical tiles; new targets use claim IDs until they are placed.

   Animal output package: COLLECT_PRODUCT -> RETURN -> DEPOSIT. A direct-return
   flag forbids inserting fertilizer collection, feed, care or another harvest
   between collection and deposit. Route geometry remains the compiler's job.

   Animal service package: FEED and optional CARE, plus a separate fertilizer
   pickup when requested. The engine-derived production and survival deadlines
   are explicit. Mark feed protecting an imminent production bonus so repair
   can preserve it according to the intent's priorities. Do not leave its
   importance hidden behind a flat $30 feed score.

   Crop package: a valid joint option on a selected member, including explicit
   ongoing watering; clear/harvest -> replant dependencies when sharing a tile.
   The compiler expands mechanical actions and enforces engine precedence.

   Start with deadline bands at meaningful sale opportunities, with h5 and h9
   resolved separately in the opening. Deadlines mean first SELLABLE hour,
   not harvest hour. Teacher exact hours can be auxiliary labels; a flexible
   window avoids forcing arbitrary route details.

C. Crew and spending plan
   Predict desired cumulative hires by a few waves, purchase priorities and
   earliest/latest useful hours, plus goods/cash reserved for accepted work.
   Include seeds bought for the next dawn: BC has shown that M&M's prebuying
   differs from our just-in-time purchases and shifts the network's inputs.

   A desired hire is not an active worker. A future sale is not spendable cash.
   The first version can use exact deterministic resource requirements from
   the accepted jobs instead of learning redundant reserve quantities.

D. Simplification order
   State which optional packages/new claims to defer first when a deadline or
   funding requirement cannot be met. Respect dependency closures: dropping a
   land purchase also deactivates its new-site jobs; dropping care need not drop
   feed. Keep engine-critical precedence separate from learned priorities.

   Existing drop_loss is imitation log-probability, not lost dollars. It can
   preserve teacher preferences, but must not be advertised as economic value.
   True fallback preferences are not directly observable from one successful
   replay; use explicit initial rules or separately validated repair labels.

Derived cumulative receipts by product/hour are an output of these packages,
not another independent set of contradictory hard targets. They are useful
auxiliary training losses and execution diagnostics.

A SMALL COMPILER WITH A CLEAR FAILURE CONTRACT

Proposed path:
  observed state -> intent -> validate/admit jobs -> assign/routes -> actions
                                     |                 |
                                     +-> receipts/input needs -> seller
  actual fills/completed actions -> ledger -> repair remaining jobs

1. Expand packages into a dependency graph. Compute shortest paths and engine
   release times, including hires and purchased goods usable next turn. Bind
   jobs only to workers that exist for an executable prefix. Future hires can
   have conditional assignments, but their work stays unfulfilled until they
   actually appear.

2. Assign ready packages by priority and deadline, using worker start position,
   supplies and completion time. Keep product-return packages intact. Use a
   small fixed insertion/repair budget; preserve a valid executable prefix
   throughout. Stop searching over herd composition, site-claim permutations,
   hire counts and economic trim ladders inside the compiler.

3. Keep the current seller for the first experiment, with a precise interface:
   actual shed inventory; conservative arrivals from accepted routes; retained
   input quantities by hour; pending purchases/hires and their order priority;
   capacity before worker drops; and the common cash ledger. Seller purchases,
   sales and hires share the ten order slots and their real list positions.
   A sale later in this turn cannot undo overflow destroyed by a worker drop.

4. On actual short fills, failed hires or missed jobs, repair only the affected
   unfinished packages. Recompute their receipts and input needs, then let the
   seller update. Allow a bounded funding/route retry; if it fails, apply the
   stated simplification order. Do not restart a large economic route search.

5. Record per-job requested / accepted / assigned / completed / late / dropped,
   with reasons such as no active crew, cash, input, site or time. Distinguish
   search-budget exhaustion from proven infeasibility. Use one completion
   ledger across intent, routes, market planning and history inference.

This removes combinatorial economic decisions, not physical constraints. The
speed claim needs profiling: if repeated sale-DP calls dominate, simplifying
the router alone will not suffice. Aim to avoid calling the full seller for
every route insertion. Rank insertions with deadlines and travel first, then
evaluate the accepted schedule and only a bounded number of repairs.

WHY THE LEDGER IS PART OF THE DESIGN

The first teleport harness accidentally counted transferred goods both in
current stock and future receipts. Its history reconstruction also interpreted
the unexplained shed increase as a purchase and fabricated an opponent sale.
Both were fixed in that private harness; this is not a claim those exact bugs
exist in the production agent. They expose an interface requirement:

  A batch is standing, carried, deposited, consumed, sold or destroyed;
  every transition is accounted once. Completed deposits cannot remain in
  future arrivals. History subtracts actual worker transfers and own fills.

Natural DROP precedes the market and can sell in that hour. The diagnostic's
free transfer occurred after the market and could sell only next hour. Label
extraction and evaluation must use the same phase definition. Also read h23
actions before night flags reset; BC already retracted false service gaps
caused by losing those actions.

FAST DISTILLATION THAT CAN REACH PRODUCTION

First freeze the schema and extractor, not a new large model architecture.

1. Use allowed M&M replay episodes as the main demonstrations. Nearby strong
   styles can be secondary data, with an explicit style condition or separate
   coherent plans. Do not average incompatible placement sequences and herd
   choices into one plan; BC has already seen ensembles blur those choices.
   Do not reintroduce CMA data, agents or decode parameters.

2. Extract completed semantic jobs, trip boundaries, actual hire waves,
   successful purchases, build/placement claim order and sellable deadlines
   with the engine. Keep requested and executed actions separate. Mark inferred
   labels and ambiguous cash-dependent intentions; replay behavior is not a
   direct observation of M&M's internal intention. Use future replay actions as
   supervision only, never as observation features. Never feed private opponent
   state or hidden world/seed data into the deployed policy.

3. Before training, compile extracted teacher jobs from held-out teacher dawns.
   Test whether the simple executor can reproduce delivery windows, production
   services and placements with the observed crew. If it cannot, locate the
   missing field or execution rule. A hindsight intent is an oracle diagnostic,
   not a deployable result or proof that dawn prediction can achieve it.

4. Warm-start the existing BC encoder and aggregate heads. Add small shared
   per-entity heads for bundles/deadlines and global heads for crew/claim order;
   use masked sequential decoding where choices share sites, money or counts.
   Begin by training new heads, then briefly fine-tune together. Only add a
   larger sequence model if measured errors require it. Use the same features,
   normalization, masks and decode in training checks and C++ export.

5. Train the distinction that caused the early-return failure: product courier
   now, separate fertilizer/service later, production feed protected. Evaluate
   these per species and production phase, not just aggregate action accuracy.
   Predict joint valid bundles, not independent feed/care bits that conflict.

6. Dawn intent need not pretend to know the afternoon. Start with deterministic
   repairs and the reactive seller. If own-state evaluation shows material
   cash-dependent decisions cannot be predicted at dawn, train a small residual
   intent head on observed intraday prefixes to revise remaining work. Preserve
   completed commitments; avoid a full policy rerun on every worker action.

7. M&M replays do not provide expert actions on arbitrary states reached by our
   new policy. Do not call self-labeling those states M&M distillation. First
   measure the shift; if correction is needed, generate feasible alternatives
   with a frozen local teacher/search and label only improvements supported by
   legal continuations. This is a later step, not a prerequisite for a first
   production-sized test.

Keep the existing episode hash holdouts, cutoff (Sep 30 07:30 UTC), reserved
confirmation exclusions and declared G3/swap exclusions. Split at episode/
world level before extracting hours; deduplicate perspectives. Freeze a data
manifest before tuning. Do not inspect the unused confirmation cohort to
choose features or deadline bands.

TEST ORDER AND DECISIONS

A. Semantic round trip, before training cost
   Recorded jobs -> compiler -> engine. Check actual sellable quantities at
   h1/h5/h9, feed before production, successful same-day land/planting, site
   claim order, later fertilizer recovery, hired worker-hours and input use.
   Allow equivalent paths and worker assignments. Test both seats and awkward
   funding/capacity cases. Require explicit reasons for every missed package.

B. Separate representation, prediction and execution
   Keep the current baseline. Test new learned intent through an adapter to
   the old executor that enforces the new fields where possible; separately
   test teacher-extracted intent and learned intent through the new executor.
   Report unsupported adapter fields; silently ignoring them is not a control.
   Oracle success plus learned failure points to prediction; oracle failure
   points to representation/execution. Freeze seller and forecaster initially.

C. Paired full games on the declared development bed
   Compare the exact exported C++ bundle, equal compute limits, identical
   worlds and both seats. Report own cash, opponent cash, their difference,
   W/T/L and half-tie score. Cluster uncertainty by world when seats share a
   world. Show days 0-9, 10-17 and 18-end so early wool cannot hide later milk
   losses. Use a preset small screen followed by a larger confirmation only
   if justified; do not repeatedly tune to the same selected winning worlds.

   Recorded M&M continuations are timing diagnostics. Full games against a
   frozen live package or clone are reactive tests against that policy, not
   live M&M. Label opponents accurately and include relevant stronger styles
   in the team's normal judge stage.

D. Production check
   Check Python/C++ inference and decode parity, legal actions, deterministic
   execution, no lost jobs after partial hires, and no duplicated receipts.
   Measure compiler/seller/inference separately: median, p95, p99 and worst
   call, hard farm days, both seats, and total game allowance. Freeze source,
   model and config hashes together. A faster but economically worse compiler
   is not a successful replacement.

SMALLEST USEFUL FIRST VERSION

Implement only ordered placement claims, product delivery packages/windows,
separate fertilizer service, and crew waves with actual-fill repair. Keep the
existing aggregate crop/animal decisions and seller. Demonstrate that teacher
intents execute correctly, distill those four additions, and run the paired
full-game screen. Add richer crop scheduling or learned selling only after
that isolates a remaining gap. This gives BC and the compiler a concrete
shared contract without replacing every working component at once.

LOCAL SOURCES CHECKED

- designs/day_intent.md and designs/day_compiler.md: current responsibility
  split, engine timing constraints, validation requirements.
- experiments/v10/sep29_bc_mm/packages/m3fc2hc/source/source/intent.hpp:
  current schema, aggregate counts and decoder trim preferences.
- experiments/v10/sep29_bc_mm/packages/m3fc2hc/source/dc11/compiler.hpp:
  funding/search options, hirecheck, latehire and shared market slots.
- work/mm_handoff/findings/bc.md: bind audit and later corrections, placement
  audit, own-state/seed effects and learned-seller limitations.
- work/mm_handoff/roles/bc.md: current data and model restrictions.
- BC transcript: latest substantive entries checked through 18:42 UTC today;
  placement and walking audit. This note is independent of any newer work.
- work/sep30_early_products/M_AND_M.md: exact action audit and its limitations.
- work/sep30_early_products/TELEPORT_FINDINGS.txt: corrected counterfactuals,
  actual-hire/missed-feed example, and rejected legal balanced-placement arm.


REVIEW 2: BC'S CONCRETE V2 DESIGN AND INITIAL LABEL EXTRACTOR
2026-09-30, 18:56 UTC. Priority: before training labels are frozen.

Read DESIGN_intent_v2.md and sep29_dc12/INTENT_V2_compiler_input.md, plus the
initial tools/label_v2.cpp and tools/collect_log.cpp. These are in-progress
files. Findings below apply to the versions with these SHA256 hashes:
  label_v2.cpp: bfaf39eb4496f722841f56f3471254be0bf3de79f96229cb84b1591fe4b5a0bf
  collect_log.cpp: 828fea28a3d8f0bf360fdbbe596fc2c8b0c3058c68aaac70581e4e3b9757fffe
  DESIGN_intent_v2.md: fb51c97385a0a7c133c9eaaccb4c67267cc5f5120381df922f627d22b6ec917a
This is source review, not a measured estimate of how often each issue occurs.

AGREEMENTS AND CHANGES TO MY FIRST PROPOSAL

The separate small model is a good way to avoid disturbing the main policy.
Use the existing placement rule first; a learned placement head is unnecessary
if the fixed rule already captures the desired behavior. Keep normal ongoing
watering (survival AND fertilized production), rather than requiring daily
watering. Retain the seller and current executor guards.

The new design names m19/splitfert+nearanimals=6 as the bar, with team-reported
+$1,205 (SE $283) on 218 worlds. I have not independently audited that result.
My earlier negative private balanced-placement result is a DIFFERENT arm and
does not invalidate this new bar. Compare v2 with the exact current frozen bar.

1. THE DEADLINE LABEL AND EXECUTOR CURRENTLY MEAN DIFFERENT THINGS

BC labels the time by which 80% of harvested units arrive. The compiler input
says the deadline applies to the day's harvested units and charges late cargo.
If 80 units arrive at h5 and 20 at night, the teacher's deliver80 is h5; charging
all 100 units for lateness changes the teacher's behavior. Conversely, two days
can have identical deliver80=h23 while one returns most useful stock early and
the other returns nothing until night. That scalar cannot reproduce both.

Minimal replacement: predict early-return QUANTITY as well as time, or a small
monotone cumulative receipt profile per product. For example, quantities first
sellable by h5, h9, h13 and end of day, capped by today's selected collections.
Use nonnegative band counts and cumulative sums to guarantee monotonicity.
Teacher stock and intended collection quantities must be explicit denominators;
do not silently apply a fraction learned on teacher harvests to all own stock.

A smaller first version is (early_units, early_deadline), with the remaining
collection following normal routes. Deadline penalties apply only to the unmet
early quota, not every late unit. Keep a direct-return flag for the selected
couriers. This avoids manufacturing a requirement to return all far stock early.
If the compiler selects which batches satisfy a quota, that small assignment
decision remains its job; do not claim that timing is then entirely learned.

The proposed h6/h12/h18/night bins also erase h5 versus h6, precisely a boundary
the early-wool work measures. Retain raw hours in the labels, then choose bins
around actual sale opportunities (at least h5 separately) after inspecting
allowed development data. Hourly receipt histograms are cheap offline labels.

2. INITIAL DELIVERY EXTRACTION CONFUSES WORKER INVENTORY LOSS WITH SHED ARRIVAL

label_v2.cpp lines 80-89 runs the entire sim.step(), then labels every negative
pocket delta as delivery. Engine sim.hpp: worker actions precede market; night
then calls drop_inventories() and clears all pockets (lines 1491-1505).

Concrete cases:
- PASS at h23 with six carried wool and shed room: pocket delta -6 is assigned
  arrival hour 23. Those units actually become sellable at next dawn, after the
  h23 market. The comment's overnight sentinel 24 is not used in this case.
- DROP six wool into one free shed slot: pocket delta -6, but only one unit
  arrives and five are destroyed (sim.hpp DROP, lines 1103-1118).
- HARVEST at h23 from an empty pocket: after the night the pocket is empty
  again, so delta is zero. The harvest and its next-dawn receipt disappear from
  the labels altogether.
- PICKUP old stock from the shed and redeposit it after a new harvest elsewhere:
  the pooled arrivals can satisfy the new harvest's 80% target without those
  harvested units returning. Filtering arrivals before the first harvest does
  not solve this because the wrong deposit can occur afterward.

Track successful harvest batches per worker/product through worker actions,
with separate deposited and destroyed quantities; track later repickups as
already delivered stock. Resolve transfers before the market and night
transfers afterward. A phase-correct observer inside an isolated extractor
is preferable to guessing from full-step deltas. Do not change the production
engine merely to collect labels. Verify the ordinary replay state remains
identical. Day 29 has no night transfer and ends after h22; never label a
terminal carried unit as future available stock.

Related: collect_log.cpp lines 60-64 flushes EVERY pending harvest of a product
on any negative pocket delta. A partial PLACE of two out of twelve units marks
all twelve delivered. It also assigns night transfers to h23. collect_read.py
lines 10-11 then calls those same-day arrivals. Consequently, the latest
"far product reaches the shed around h22" aggregate is not yet a reliable
sellable-time measurement. The geometric association may still hold; quantify
it again with correct phases and quantities before using it as a target.

3. FERTILIZER LABEL MUST IDENTIFY THE COLLECTOR'S VISIT, NOT THE TILE'S CLOCK

label_v2.cpp lines 91-93 calls fertilizer "with harvest" when ANY harvest on
that tile occurred in the last two turns. It does not remember the harvesting
worker or an uninterrupted visit. M&M can harvest with worker A, send A home,
and collect fertilizer next turn with worker B: this would be labeled bundled,
although it is exactly the separate-service behavior we want.

Record unit/day, visit ID, harvest time, departure and fertilizer time. For
the return problem, distinguish "fertilizer delayed the product courier before
its deposit" from "another worker collected it". These are stronger semantics
than nearby action timestamps. Also keep the count of eligible animals with
NO product harvest that day; they still may provide useful fertilizer. A
species-wide majority class can erase a minority of critical product couriers.

4. THE INITIAL EXTRACTOR'S END-OF-DAY BOUNDARY NEEDS AN AUDIT

const Farm& F is a reference to sim.st.farms[seat], not a saved before-state.
After sim.step(), F and G name the same updated farm. Tile tests after line 80
therefore read after-night state at h23. Water's denominator counts plants at
dawn, while its numerator checks final tiles: newly planted, cleared or dead
plants can change membership. Save the dawn entity set and mark its successful
services before the night update.

The row is emitted only when hour == HOURS-1 (line 96). The final playable day
ends at hour 22, so day 29 has no row. Explicitly emit at last_hour(day) and
mark truncated replays; missing terminal days should not silently pass the
join. Count expected versus extracted rows and unmatched meta keys before fit.

5. TWO CREW WAVES MUST NOT MOVE LATE WORKERS EARLIER IN THE TEACHER LABEL

The current extractor sums every hire after h0 into crew_w2 and uses the FIRST
later hire hour. If two workers arrive from orders at h1 and another two at h10,
the label becomes four orders at h1. That can demand money and order slots the
teacher did not have, and gives the oracle executor extra early worker-hours.
First report how many days really have >2 nonempty hire hours and the worker-
hour distortion under this compression. Keep the raw hire[24] label so the
representation can change without replaying the corpus.

For a compact fallback, two predicted cumulative crew milestones plus actual-
funding admission is reasonable; evaluate its approximation honestly. Mask
wave2_hour when wave2_count=0, respect the ten-slot limit jointly with sales,
and check the 0-8 / 0-6 count ranges against the actual distribution. Never
silently clamp out-of-range teacher labels. The compiler's one extra hire is
an explicit repair, with its own cost and actual-fill check.

6. THE V2 MODEL SHOULD SEE THE MAIN NETWORK'S ACTUAL WORK REQUEST

The same dawn can produce different crop/animal asks under the package and
the copy. A v2 network of dawn global features alone emits the same crew for
both, even when one asks for more planting or service. Add a compact summary
of the DECODED main intent: selected service counts, new claims, land, product
units requested for collection, and protected production feed. These are
available at deployment and make the side model reusable across main models.

Train first on teacher intent summaries, then validate with predicted main
intents on held-out dawns. That substitution is a measurable train/deploy
shift. Do not quietly use teacher asks during deployed v2 evaluation.

Add a little task-specific geometry: held product selected for collection by
distance ring, nearest-return time, and total visit workload. The current
256 global features include a mean distance over ALL producers, not which
ready milk or wool is near. Rich grid models are not necessary for this.

7. MAKE JOINT EXECUTION QUALITY THE CHEAP GATE

Per-field accuracy versus a majority baseline is useful but insufficient.
Mostly-night delivery or skip-fertilizer classes can dominate accuracy while
rare early wool days are wrong. Report day 3-9 separately, quantity-weighted
early receipt error, missing feed before production, and excess worker-hours.
For ordinal delivery time use timing/quantity error as well as classification.

Before spending on three seeds, get one exported model through oracle-label
and predicted-label execution. If ensembling later, score complete masked
tuples or decode conditionally; independent argmax of averaged crew count,
wave hour and delivery heads can choose a combination no teacher used. Do not
assume the forecaster ensemble result transfers to coupled action fields.

8. GUARANTEE THAT THE INTENT ACTUALLY REMOVES COMPILER WORK

All-optional fields preserve compatibility, but the v2-enabled path should
explicitly bypass replaced searches. Count hire candidates, site candidates,
full seller calls, funding retries and route evaluations. A late-arrival penalty
added to the old optimizer could improve timing while making the compiler
slower. Fixed placement in BC's scope concerns animals; do not remove crop
site search unless a replacement crop rule/assignment is defined too.

Useful first acceptance result: teacher v2 labels achieve their stated early
quantities with no phantom crew, then predicted v2 on the exact bar meets the
same checks at lower measured runtime. Full-game margin remains the next gate.

SUGGESTED ORDER FOR BC

First fix event accounting and measure representation loss (80% compression,
two-wave compression, species fertilizer majority). Then freeze the smaller
schema, add intent workload features, train one small side model, and compare
teacher versus predicted execution. The broad redesign can remain small;
accurate labels and an exact interface matter more than adding many heads.

FOLLOW-UP 18:59 UTC: ENGINE CHECKS AND THE NEAR-ONLY REVISION

I ran six isolated engine cases in
  work/sep30_intent_review/engine_label_cases.cpp
using the existing fast_game_engine/sim.hpp, with AddressSanitizer and
UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer. All assertions passed, with no sanitizer findings.
Output: work/sep30_intent_review/engine_label_cases.txt.

- h23 PASS with six carried wool: pocket -6, shed +6, but an h23 sell order
  sells zero. Those goods first become sellable next dawn.
- h23 DROP with the same wool: pocket -6 and an h23 sell order sells all six.
- DROP six with only one free shed slot: one deposited, five destroyed.
- PLACE two from twelve carried: two deposited, ten still carried.
- HARVEST six at h23: actual harvest six and overnight deposit six, but net
  whole-step pocket change zero.
- Day 29 h22 PASS: game ends with the carried goods still carried. There is
  no h23 action or night transfer.

These verify the engine mechanisms behind the source review; I did not run
BC's complete extractor over a corpus or estimate its aggregate label error.
Reproduce from the repository root:
  conda run -n kaggriculture g++ -std=c++20 -O1 -g -fsanitize=address,undefined -fno-omit-frame-pointer -I . work/sep30_intent_review/engine_label_cases.cpp -o work/sep30_intent_review/engine_label_cases
  conda run -n kaggriculture work/sep30_intent_review/engine_label_cases

BC's 18:55 transcript says Imitation requested labels from near animals only
(rings 0-3). That makes the target less dominated by distant stock, but the
executor must apply the same eligibility mask and quantity denominator. A
deadline learned on near stock cannot be charged to every unit of the product.
Near-versus-far must be determined from the actual observed farm and selected
collect jobs, not teacher coordinates carried into deployment.

This exposes a separate comparison worth logging: for each product/day, show
near selected units, far selected units, early eligible quota, and achieved
sellable quantities. If a placement change moves a cow between categories,
report the resulting change in target as well as execution. Otherwise a model
can appear more accurate because the difficult milk was removed from its target.

Keep night as NEXT_DAWN and terminal-unsold as UNSOLD, separate from h23 and
from NO_COLLECTION. Missing/ambiguous labels need a mask, not a negative hour
that accidentally becomes the default earliest or latest class.

Finally, a deadline becoming an arbitrary dollar lateness penalty leaves an
economic tradeoff in the compiler. For the first slim executor, define the
decision order explicitly: preserve accepted mandatory production/survival
work, meet the chosen early quota if feasible, then minimize extra travel and
cost. Report unmet quotas and bounded repairs. If dollar penalties are retained,
freeze them for the first comparison and report their violations; do not hide
a new penalty-tuning search inside the claimed compiler simplification.


REVIEW 3: MEASURED LABEL RANGES, CONFIGURATION AND REMAINING-WORK SEMANTICS
2026-09-30, 19:05 UTC.

The updated design has adopted binding fields, direct-return packages, h1/h5/h9
bins, decoded-intent conditioning, style separation and execution ledgers.
Those are substantive improvements. The near-only extractor now associates
harvests with workers. Its version checked here is SHA256
1b6a335792ebf291eddbeea3de449c4ba377c43a004dd06c07cf847787963eea.
It still flushes whole batches on any negative delta at a shed tile, so partial
PLACE, overflow, h23 HARVEST and h23 PASS while on a shed tile remain relevant
cases. The engine checks in REVIEW 2 can be used as acceptance fixtures.

1. THE PROPOSED CREW HEAD CANNOT REPRESENT MUCH OF THE TEACHER DATA

I audited a snapshot of the newly produced mm_labels.csv, excluding reserved
confirmation, all list_g3w.txt worlds, list_exact.txt swap worlds, list_pkm1_t30
worlds, and shared episode hash buckets 0/1. This is a mechanical label audit,
not a trained model or a game evaluation. The extractor was still writing; the
snapshot contains 9,981 complete rows from 357 perspectives, days 1-28, with
the last perspective only partly present. No duplicate episode/seat/day keys.

Results against the design's wave-1 classes 0..8 and wave-2 classes 0..6:
- Wave 1 > 8: 4,343 / 9,981 rows, 43.5%.
  Specifically, 4,320 rows request 9 and 23 request 10 successful h0 hires.
- On days 3-9: 675 / 2,499 rows, 27.0%, exceed wave-1 cap 8.
- Wave 2 > 6: 34 rows; observed values reach 9. This is the sum of all later
  hires, so a value below 10 does not establish that it was one real wave.

Increase wave-1 support to the physical 0..10 range before training. Determine
wave-2 support and timestamp compression from the raw hire events; preserve
overflow/multiple-wave counters instead of clipping. The one-hire compiler
repair must not become a routine correction for a deliberately truncated head.

This also makes shared h0 slots essential: nine hires leave just one market
order position, ten leave none. An exact crew prediction can still fail if the
current seller also inserts several h0 sales. The final merged market list,
not each component's independent output, is the executable object. Record
requested hire time, submitted order position, actual fill and active-from hour.

Artifacts:
  work/sep30_intent_review/audit_label_snapshot.py
  work/sep30_intent_review/label_snapshot_audit.json
The JSON records the snapshot hash, exclusions, day coverage and histograms.
Re-running the script reads the latest in-progress file, so totals may increase.

2. THE WATERING MEMBERSHIP ISSUE OCCURS IN THE GENERATED DATA

For a target described as "dawn-standing plants watered today", the numerator
cannot exceed the dawn denominator. Yet the snapshot has:
- tomatoes: 970 rows with watered > dawn plants;
- strawberries: 1,328 rows with watered > dawn plants.
On days 3-9 alone these counts are 381 and 979.

This matches the source's mixture of dawn counts and end-of-day tile membership.
Do not use these ratios for a consistency decision or train a watering head on
them. The head is out of v1 scope already, so the cheap option is to mask these
labels until the entity cohort is tracked correctly. Keep optional analysis of
new-plant watering in a separate target.

3. KEEP REQUESTED FEED; DO NOT SILENTLY ENABLE keepfed=1

Both design notes list keepfed among executor guards. In the current source it
is a POLICY OVERRIDE: it raises feed_n above in.feed when it decides an animal
the network would release is worth retaining. That is different from ensuring
the compiler completes the feed the intent requested.

Source: src_m14sf/dc11/compiler.cpp around lines 243-252; default keep_fed=false
in compiler.hpp. The Day compiler's own stop list reports keepfed=1 on the copy
at -$325 (SE $182), with 8 worse / 2 better / 20 equal games. This is not proof
it loses everywhere; it is reason not to turn it on as an assumed neutral guard.

For v2, retain the exact baseline setting. Protect accepted in.feed work,
especially before a production night, and log any dropped feed. A deliberate
network decision to let an animal escape is not an executor failure. Changing
that decision should be a separately named policy experiment.

4. MAKE V2 FEATURE PREPARATION INDEPENDENT OF THE MAIN MODEL'S SIDECARS

"Same 256 features" can refer to two different buffers. Raw global_features()
is modified in decode_intent by gblind, style, condition, goal/goalraw and
land-input settings before main-model inference (net_i/agent/bc_opus/source/
agent.cpp around lines 292-325). The training arrays start from the raw buffer;
train.py applies additional style/condition/goal transformations.

Define one v2_features(observation, history, decoded_intent, v2_config) and match
it in extraction/training/export. Reuse raw feature extraction, but do not
accidentally inherit whichever package/copy main-model masks or hindsight-goal
slots happened to be active. Apply the v2 style explicitly. For v1, exclude
unused condition/goal slots rather than consume unexplained values.

I checked the normal extractor's opponent-flow inputs: it calls
history.expected(day, 3, rival), just like decode_intent. I found no basis here
to call those slots future-observation leakage. The issue is feature and
configuration parity, not an established hidden-state bug.

5. CUMULATIVE RECEIPTS AND REMAINING WORK NEED DISTINCT STATE

Define three separate records:
- Day target: selected collection jobs, early quota and deadline, absolute
  hire-order hours, and the day's service decisions.
- Compiled remaining plan: unfinished jobs on actual workers, conditional
  future hires, future receipts and reserved inputs.
- Execution progress: successful harvest/deposit quantities, completed jobs,
  filled hires, spent orders and dropped commitments.

The early quota is cumulative first delivery, not current shed stock. Example:
six wool are deposited at h3 and sold at h3; at h4 the shed has zero wool but
the six-unit delivery quota is satisfied. A replan must not collect another
six to "restore" that stock. Repicking/redepositing the same batch also cannot
earn delivery credit twice. Keep provenance sufficient for these counters.

Likewise, a wave ordered at h0 is consumed once. At h6 replan only remaining
hires; do not reinterpret crew[0] as "hire this many now", reset the daily hire
price index, or reintroduce jobs already completed. A partial fill leaves only
the unfilled remainder eligible for a later order, subject to actual cash and
the plan's deadline.

If a residual intraday model is added later, specify whether it predicts a new
total target or a remaining target. Convert explicitly before updating the
ledger. Mixing those meanings would recreate the inventory/future-receipt
double counting that invalidated the first teleport benchmark.

NEXT SMALL IMPLEMENTATION DECISION

Freeze an example containing: one product quota already deposited and sold,
one worker hired out of a requested two, and a feed job still pending. Both the
ordinary next step and an explicit replan should emit the same remaining work
and predicted receipts. This tests the new interface without waiting for any
neural training or full-game batch.

6. AN ORACLE INTENT IS NOT AN ORACLE FUNDING POLICY

The proposed oracle test combines M&M's crew/receipt targets with our routes
and our current seller. M&M's later hires and purchases were funded by M&M's
actual earlier sales. If our seller holds those products, the identical dawn
and perfect v2 targets do not guarantee that those hires are affordable at the
teacher's hour. Conversely, pinning teacher cash while changing sales would
give the executor free funding and hide the problem.

Use three distinct checks, in this order:
- Reconstruction: ordinary recorded actions through the engine, with the
  label observer attached. Engine states, successful transfers and labeled
  events agree exactly. No policy component is replaced.
- Conditional route feasibility: can the executor satisfy the work packages
  given the resource availability they assume? If resource availability is
  supplied from the recording for this diagnostic, label it explicitly as
  conditional/oracle, not a legal agent improvement.
- Integrated legal execution: teacher v2 targets with our real seller and
  actual fills. Report short cash / late input / no crew / route-time misses
  separately. A cash miss here is a seller/funding-interface problem, not
  evidence that the v2 classifier needs another training run.

The same distinction applies to the teacher-vs-predicted comparison: freeze
the old main intent when testing only v2 prediction, then introduce predicted
main intent as a separate test. Otherwise crop-count changes also alter crew
demand and receipt quantities, confounding a claimed v2 prediction error.

7. STOP CONDITIONS SHOULD MATCH THE CLAIM

For a first deployable speed experiment, report three independent outcomes:
- Is label/accounting reconstruction correct?
- Is the complete agent faster under the same budget, including its repairs?
- Is full-game margin acceptable against the frozen current bar?

Per-field majority accuracy is not a necessary economic stopping threshold:
wrong-by-one crew and wrong-by-five crew have different costs, and a different
legal route can serve the same work. Use it to diagnose the model, then measure
joint feasible-plan rate, early quantity deficits, missed requested services
and runtime. Strict engine legality and correct accounting remain hard gates.

The historical "untouched 122" has now been inspected for m19. It remains a
useful paired comparison cohort, but after further decisions based on it, do
not present it as a newly untouched confirmation for v2. Keep the separate
reserved confirmation games uninspected until the final selected candidate
reaches the team's confirmation stage.


REVIEW 4 -- FIRST V2 EXECUTOR: VERIFIED FAILURES BEFORE ECONOMIC TESTS
2026-09-30, 19:12 UTC

BC and Imitation now prefer an opening rule table to an MLP. I agree that this
is a good first implementation. I independently inspected the new Day compiler
tree work/sep29_fund/src_v2 and tested a frozen copy of its router. No active
Claude source, tests, model, or session log was changed. All findings below
refer to this in-progress snapshot; they may already be fixed when read.

Evidence:
- work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases.cpp
- work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases.txt
- work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_overflow.txt
- work/sep30_intent_review/v2_snapshot/{dc11/router.cpp,dc11/router.hpp,source/world.hpp}
Router snapshot SHA256:
02325203802157e9efa6b07cd3d553b9dee75bcb09c94ca0c922e3c9d92b5046

These are isolated C++ router fixtures, not sampled games, teacher rows or
profit estimates. Ordinary cases pass their diagnostic assertions without
sanitizer errors; the separate overflow case intentionally exits nonzero.

1. DEADLINES ARE ONLY PRODUCT-ORDER KEYS

router.cpp:935 courier() checks that a deadline is present, sorts products by
their deadlines, then moves ALL assigned near harvests of one product before
ONE shed stop. The walk/cost does not enforce the actual deadline. Assignment
has already happened without this delivery requirement.

Verified fixture: one farmer, sheep at tiles 34 and 24, starting at 44. Asking
for wool by h5 gives HARVEST, HARVEST, then DROP 12 wool at h6. Asking for h17
gives byte-identical actions and deposits. It is a priority rule, not a binding
time constraint.

This also contradicts the comment and adopted direct-return contract: another
harvest happens before the first product is returned. An attached multi-action
stop is not split either. Verified HARVEST h1, COLLECT_FERTILIZER h2, DROP h4.
The opening script's fert_mode=later should avoid that second case when the
binder splits correctly; the general courier helper does not guarantee it.

Do not infer that immediate return after every animal is always best. In this
two-sheep fixture, separate returns would get the first six units in sooner
but the second six later. That is exactly why the contract needs quantity by
time (and optional individual direct-return packages), not a blanket command
to move all harvests to the front. Match the requested contract explicitly.

2. CREW FEASIBILITY IS CHECKED BEFORE THE REWRITE THAT CAN BREAK IT

The v2 branch measures search.late() and decides whether to add its one repair
hire around router.cpp:1142. Night repair, trimming and spawn/local search
also happen before courier(). Then lines 1277-1295 rewrite the routes and
truncate every suffix whose actions no longer fit. The crew repair is not
repeated on these final routes.

Verified fixture: farmer at h17, a near harvest and required FEED. Both fit
before courier(). After its extra shed trip, the route is two turns late and
FEED is in the suffix that RouteOut drops. This is an intraday route fixture,
not a claim that a particular full game lost a feed. It proves the repair's
feasibility result does not apply to the route eventually emitted.

Fix the ordering: build delivery work packages before assignment/crew fitting.
If a final rewrite remains, recheck and repair that exact result, bounded by
the intended extra-hire budget. Never declare the pre-rewrite result feasible
and treat later dropped required jobs as a successful intent execution.

3. COURIER BUFFER CHECK HAPPENS AFTER THE INVALID WRITE

buf has MAX_ROUTE=96 entries. courier writes R.n + number_of_target_products
entries, then checks m > MAX_ROUTE. A 95-stop route with two products writes
entry 96 before reaching the guard. ASan/UBSan reproduce a stack-buffer-overflow
at frozen router.cpp:954. This is a synthetic capacity stress case; I have not
observed a real opening route reach it. Check capacity before writing, or use
a bounded append that fails before the first out-of-range write.

4. DELAYED-HIRE SPAWN USES THE WRONG HOUR

start_of() respects cash_hire_hour, but sync_spawns() always samples occupancy
at farmer.hour + wave (h0/h1), even when the second wave is ordered at h5.
Verified fixture: farmer is outside the shed at h1 and back on 44 at h5.
The new hire starts at h6, but the router predicts tile 44; the engine's
least-occupied-shed rule requires tile 45.

Use each actual hire order's hour and only workers already present then.
This also affects the older latehire path. The fixed script's h1 second wave
does not trigger this particular error; teacher v2 labels with later hires do.
This check proves the router prediction is wrong, not that every downstream
realization necessarily accepts an invalid route.

5. TWO HARNESS/API ISSUES TO FIX BEFORE PROMOTING THIS VERSION

- tools_dc11/teacher_day.cpp sets intent_v2 once for the starting day. With
  TEACHER_DAYS > 1, later dawns can update the main teacher_intent but keep the
  STARTING day's v2 crew/deadlines. Default span=1 is unaffected. Set v2 per
  actual dawn, clear it outside scope, and fail explicitly on a missing oracle
  row instead of silently running baseline fields in an oracle comparison.
- The new mutable thread_local intent_v2 pointer and thread_local script in
  dc11/compiler.cpp violate prompts/local_agent.md's instance-state rule.
  Pass the optional intent explicitly through compile/bind or put it in the
  owning agent instance. The scripted wrapper normally clears its pointer,
  but that does not make shared mutable policy state a valid production API.

There is also a measurement mismatch: teacher_day maps recorded h6 to bin h9,
while the new rule script requests exact h6. Either compare exact hours in
both arms or label those as different constraints. The current all-product
plan.receipts ledger also cannot alone certify a quota for near-source units;
retain the target quantity/source cohort, planned receipts and realized
receipts separately. Cumulative receipts already sold still count as done.

The new gate reader should not divide h6 deposits only by the units eventually
deposited that day. Dropping harvests or leaving cargo overnight shrinks that
denominator and can make a worse plan score 100%. Freeze the requested near
quantity from the dawn intent; report h6 quantity, deficit against that target,
total harvested, intraday deposited, overnight deposited and lost separately.
Keep teacher-volume comparison separate when our main intent requests a
different amount. Otherwise a six-unit plan can appear to beat a 30-unit one.

6. WHAT THE FIXED-SCRIPT DISCOVERY DOES AND DOES NOT ESTABLISH

The crew modes are useful and avoid an unnecessary model. The delivery table
is only an 80th-percentile statistic. Equal h6 values do not imply equal h1-h5
flow or an identical worker script. For example, 18 units at h1 + 12 at h6
versus all 30 at h6 both have deliver80=h6; only the first delivers wool early
enough for h1-h5 sales.

Measure cumulative near-source wool AND milk at h1, h3, h5, h6 and h9. Keep
raw unrounded delivery times for this check. The extracted table says our
milk is already earlier than the teacher on d8; a teacher h6 deadline is an
upper bound, not a reason to delay our existing h4-h5 milk.

Do not describe fertilizer-later=97-100% as a verified visitor-order contract
yet: the extractor still includes animals with no product harvest and uses
tile/timing proximity rather than worker identity (REVIEW 2). It supports a
splitfert hypothesis, which already has separate legal-game evidence.

7. SMALLEST USEFUL NEXT EXPERIMENT AND FAST IMPLEMENTATION

Freeze the current selected baseline and use three separate additions:
- Crew table only, keeping its seller and delivery objective unchanged.
- Delivery packages only with the same requested main work and baseline crew.
- Both together, with the single bounded crew repair.

The current openscript=2 changes both the crew floor and the delivery value
(half value after the cutoff), so it is not a crew-only diagnostic. It also
retains the old hire search; its runtime cannot establish a slim-executor win.

For the cheap executor, make the table a default policy that emits explicit
work and quantities. Attach harvest-to-deposit precedence to the early
packages, assign them to the fixed crew first, reserve the mandatory feed /
water work, then fit optional work. Evaluate the deadline and required-work
shortfalls on the FINAL routes. Allow only the intended bounded repairs.
Log every changed crew/wave, failed package and dropped requested service.
This removes decisions from the compiler without moving them into an opaque
postprocessing step. Full-game margin then tests the policy, with a separate
runtime measurement testing whether the compiler actually became cheaper.

Reproduce from repository root:
conda run -n kaggriculture g++ -std=c++20 -O1 -g -fsanitize=address,undefined -fno-omit-frame-pointer -I work/sep30_intent_review/v2_snapshot -I . work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases.cpp -o work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases
conda run --no-capture-output -n kaggriculture work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases
conda run --no-capture-output -n kaggriculture work/sep30_intent_review/v2_router_cases overflow


REVIEW 5 -- EXACT REPLAY ACCOUNTING AND WHAT H6 HIDES
2026-09-30, 19:22 UTC

I built a separate replay observer, using an engine snapshot whose only engine
change is exposing existing methods for diagnostics. It observes each worker
action before the market/night transition; credits only accepted deposits;
keeps overflow losses separate; and uses a FIFO attribution convention for
partial mixed cargo. No live compiler, engine or teacher code was edited.

Scope: 12 M&M perspectives from Sep 28 01:26-02:22 UTC, selected from BC's list
after excluding reserved confirmation, all listed G3/swap worlds and hash
buckets 0/1. Exact created timestamps checked; all pre-cutoff. This is an old,
small slice, useful for accounting and examples, not a representative payoff
estimate or a new training set.

All 8,628 reconstructed worker phases matched the normal engine phase; all
8,628 complete steps matched recorded trace hashes. Night transfer observation
also matched the engine's drop_inventories result. ASan/UBSan were enabled.
There were no thin-product pickups. One day had a partial transfer from mixed
near/far cargo; I excluded that entire day's four products from near/far label
comparison because item identity is not uniquely observable. The observer
flags such cases instead of presenting FIFO attribution as physical truth.

Against the initial mm_labels.csv, among 1,340 comparable product-days:
- 144 product-days differ in at least one field.
- 65 near-harvest quantity fields and 82 far-harvest quantity fields differ.
- 19 deliver80 fields differ after mapping our "never reached 80%" marker to
  BC's existing "not today" value 24, so this is not a naming-only mismatch.
- ZERO differences on days 3-9 in this sample.

That last result matters: the extraction defects are real, but I would not
claim they invalidate BC's opening table on this evidence. They DO need fixing
before using the same extractor to infer the days 10-20 / late-game policy.
Example: 114450926 seat 1 d27 milk is labeled zero near harvest / no deadline;
the engine actually harvested two near units at h23 and deposited overnight.
Another example: that perspective's d19 far strawberries are 12 units, not 6.

Opening cumulative near deliveries, mean units across the 12 perspectives:

day / product    harvested    by h1    by h3    by h5    by h6
6 / wool             18         0        6       12       18
8 / milk             12         6        6        6       12
9 / wool             12         0        4        8       12

All these product-days have deliver80=h6. The useful policy is staggered
receipts: a third of wool by h3, two thirds by h5, the rest by h6; half of the
milk is already available at h1. A lone h6 deadline can reproduce the label
while missing every one of those earlier sales opportunities.

Do not hardcode these absolute quantities into another farm: this teacher
slice has 18 wool on d6 and 12 on d9. Emit quantity targets from the actual
requested work/held yield, then compare source groups and time bands. Check
the same cumulative curves on the selected current baseline before adding
more movement rules; Claude's new h6 gate already says that baseline is close
at h6, but it does not resolve h1-h5.

Evidence and reproduction:
- work/sep30_intent_review/flow_probe.cpp (observer and parity checks)
- work/sep30_intent_review/prepare_flow_probe.py (snapshot / protected-data filter)
- work/sep30_intent_review/flow_probe_manifest.json (selection timestamps and engine hashes)
- work/sep30_intent_review/flow_probe.csv and flow_probe.log
- work/sep30_intent_review/read_flow_probe.py and flow_probe_summary.json
Build: conda run -n kaggriculture g++ -std=c++20 -O1 -g -fsanitize=address,undefined -fno-omit-frame-pointer -I work/sep30_intent_review/observer_snapshot -I . work/sep30_intent_review/flow_probe.cpp -o <fresh binary path>
Run replay diagnostics through work/runq/slot.sh, one slot; no agent is called.


REVIEW 6 -- FUTURE HIRE WAVES ARE UNDERCOSTED
2026-09-30, 19:27 UTC

Verified with the exact planned_cost function extracted from the current
compiler, then with real engine HIRE actions, under ASan/UBSan:

already hired    future waves    sum used by caller    actual engine cost
0                8 + 1                     55                  88
0                9 + 1                     89                 143
4                2 + 1                     18                  26
0                10 + 0                   143                 143

planned_cost initializes its local hire index from obs.self().hires_today.
That is correct for one current action, including multiple hires in it. It
is wrong when callers add several future actions using the SAME observation:
the next action starts again at the old Fibonacci index.

Current src_v2/dc11/compiler.cpp call sites:
- around 1659, total commitments before enabling market scenarios;
- around 1707, cumulative purchase needs for the cash-selling objective;
- around 1885, commitments before pulling an animal purchase forward (calls
  the helper once per future order, so can even repeat the cheap index within
  one future wave).

Carry a projected hire index through a chronological scan of future orders,
starting from actual hires_today. Reset it only on the next real day. Keep the
single-action helper's current semantics for current-hour cash checks. The
fixture shows a carried index matches all four actual engine totals.

Limits: the current-hour cover and full funding simulation still exist. This
does NOT establish that this bug caused the earlier missing-feed example or
that fixing it improves margin. It does establish that the cheap future-cash
ledger is inconsistent with the engine, especially for the proposed d8/d9
second waves. It predates v2, so compare a fix on the selected base as well.

Also, a requested crew of six producing fewer than six hires is not by itself
evidence of insufficient cash. router.cpp around 1217 prunes empty trailing
routes, including in the binding-v2 branch. Distinguish requested, capped,
assigned, ordered and filled crew counts before labeling a deficit "funding".

Evidence: work/sep30_intent_review/{planned_cost_snapshot.inc,
planned_cost_snapshot.json,capture_cost_function.py,cost_wave_cases.cpp,
cost_wave_cases.txt}. The snapshot manifest records the compiler source hash.

Proposed fix (active compiler untouched):
work/sep30_intent_review/future_hire_cost.patch, generated with source-hash
manifest by propose_hire_cost_patch.py. It carries one local projected hire
index through the three future-order scans while retaining single-action
calls. The exact proposed helper passes ASan/UBSan checks for 9+1 waves and
ten individually scanned orders (143 total), plus unchanged single-wave cost.
This is ready for owner review, not a tested economic improvement.


REVIEW 7 -- CHECK THE DAWN-SELLER PIVOT'S CAUSAL CLAIM
2026-09-30, 19:33 UTC

Claude now reports the opening-script combined arms lose on the 48-world
real-opponent bed: binding -615 (SE 457), soft -202 (SE 331). Both miss the
team's minimum-effect gate. Stop those arms. The reported comparison changes
crew AND delivery policy, so it does not separately estimate crew-only value.
My executor findings are relevant if v2 is reused; they are not a reason to
keep spending games on a failed combined policy.

A two-day seller diagnostic is a reasonable next direction, but "tonight's
dump lowers tomorrow's new-harvest price" is not by itself the causal test.

Engine control: with no intervening opponent trades or demand, selling six
wool at h21 versus next h0 produces IDENTICAL complete engine states after
h0, including cash, market inventory and six newly produced wool harvested at
h0. Waiting until h1 crosses the h0 town drain and changes the result (+1 in
this tiny fixture, not a game estimate). Evidence:
work/sep30_intent_review/midnight_sale_cases.cpp and midnight_sale_cases.txt.
Passing binary is midnight_sale_cases_v3. Earlier drafts failed because a
manually advanced public clock did not advance the engine's private demand
timers; the verified case advances normally from reset before setting up the
farm. All final assertions pass under ASan/UBSan.

Therefore distinguish: h21 -> h0 (before demand), h21 -> h1 (after demand),
and letting the next-day seller choose freely. These are different treatments.
Measure intervening opponent sales, input purchases, shop/town drains, shed
overflow, units sold and final stock. Holding an evening lot can destroy
incoming night cargo or delay an input purchase; a failed unprotected hold is
not a clean rejection of longer-horizon valuation.

The current DP already looks beyond today for held stock: inventory_at at
remaining + hold_steps (usually tomorrow h12), hold_supply, and optionally
rival_night. The missing candidate term is future OWN revenue on new supply,
not the absence of all next-day information. When adding it, avoid counting
tomorrow's own or rival supply twice through hold_supply / future_rival.

Use tomorrow's actual eligible production pattern (or a forecast of it), not
today's output copied forward: sheep, cows and ongoing crops have different
production days. Start with an oracle diagnostic to measure whether the term
has value, then replace it with observation-derived estimates. Oracle future
actions or inventory must not enter the production agent.

Keep the compiler-speed objective separate. The v2 rule arm's negative margin
does not prove a smaller compiler is impossible, and a passed delivery gate
does not establish faster execution. No complete-agent runtime comparison has
been reported for this new interface yet. A useful next architecture check is
whether the slim executor can realize the CURRENT selected agent's accepted
work/receipt plan cheaply before giving it different teacher targets.


REVIEW 8 -- WHEAT COUNTERS: SMALL FIXES BEFORE INFERRING A NEW PLAN
2026-09-30, 19:43 UTC

The latest label_v2.cpp still measures wheat harvested/fed from whole-step
worker pocket differences. This mixes feeding with the night transfer and
misses h23 harvests. Three sanitizer-tested engine cases reproduce:
- h23 FEED with five wheat carried: one fed, four deposited at night; current
  label counts five fed.
- h23 HARVEST of six wheat: six produced and transferred at night; current
  label counts zero harvested.
- First worker harvests wheat; second plants tomato on that tile in the same
  turn: one successful planting; the before/after is-plant flag counts zero.

The simplest fix uses data the extractor already has:
- total harvested wheat = delta of Farm::produced[WHEAT];
- wheat fed = count of OP_FEED in sanitize_joint_actions' accepted actions;
- plantings by crop = count of accepted OP_PLANT, indexed by its argument.
Do not count unsuccessful raw requests. Keep sold and bought as actual fills.

I replayed the SAME 12 permitted perspectives as REVIEW 5. Every step passed
recorded-state parity AND the wheat stock identity:
  change(shed + carried) = harvest + buy - sell - feed - discarded.
8,628 checks passed under ASan/UBSan.

Days 10-28, per-game totals in this small Sep 28 sample:
                    existing formula      corrected
wheat harvested          725.17             750.08
wheat fed                327.58             323.42
wheat planted            156.75             156.75

Harvest differs on 47 world-days; feed on 11. No planting counter differs in
these recordings (the same-turn replacement failure is a synthetic reachable
case, not an observed driver here). These are comparisons of formulas on the
same recorded actions, not a new teacher-vs-our-agent estimate. They support
fixing the input/output balance; they do not negate BC's observed planting
gap or prove that more wheat helps.

In fact, Imitation relayed Improve Agent's latest carrot-to-wheat intervention:
-5,162 (SE 791), 44 games, own -3,890 and opponent +1,272. That aggressive
substitution overshot late wheat and removed carrots. Do not generalize it to
every wheat change, but do not turn a teacher count gap directly into a large
crop replacement either. Preserve the crop it displaces and the existing
funding/feeding plan in the next narrowly scoped comparison.

Evidence: work/sep30_intent_review/wheat_label_cases.cpp,
wheat_label_probe.log, wheat_label_probe.csv, read_wheat_probe.py,
wheat_label_summary.json. Same selection/protection manifest as flow_probe.

Package check (separate, 19:37 UTC): m19fc3vens BUILD.json matches all 30
entries; the archive's 29 payload files match the same hashes. All model files
match m3fc3vens_hc except .dc11, whose only added keys are splitfert=10 and
nearanimals=6. No openscript key. Decode remains 93faad06. The candidate source
omits newer inactive animalring/sitelife/nearanimals=7 experiments in the live
src_m14sf tree; its splitfert / nearanimals=6 code is present. This is artifact
consistency, not an independent agent run. Evidence: bundle_audit.json and
audit_bundle.py. The inherited source/SNAPSHOT.txt is stale provenance text.

REVIEW 9 -- Hybrid opponent: useful sensitivity test, incomplete validation
2026-09-30, 19:48 UTC

Imitation reports the 48-world hybrid result for m19 versus LIVE as -40
(SE 480), own -1,830 and opponent -1,800. This is a good reason not to promote
the opening keys on the earlier lineage result alone. It does not by itself
identify late wool as the cause or establish performance against live M&M.

I inspected src_m14or7/tools_dc11/duel_mm.cpp and runs/hybopp/run.sh, without
reading protected cohort rows or running another full-game batch. This bed
keeps the recorded opponent's farm orders, lends it money, and changes sales
of products 1-7. Wheat/fertilizer sales stay recorded. Its DP also receives
the original recording's future deposits and next-dawn room. That is a useful
conditional fixed-farm experiment, not a complete live opponent policy.

Two concrete issues need checks before giving this bed decisive weight:

1. The loan loop compares total dollars spent, not successful order fills
   (lines 437-447). In an engine fixture, the recorded player has $45, buys
   one wheat for $25, then one carrot seed for $20. At a changed wheat price
   of $45, it buys the wheat and fails to buy the seed. Both spend $45, so
   got >= need passes and the harness lends nothing. ASan/UBSan passes this
   reproduction in work/sep30_intent_review/loan_fill_case.cpp and .txt.
   This proves a reachable failure, NOT its occurrence in the 48 games.
   Nor can loans fix missing capacity or different worker state. Check actual
   recorded successful quantities and subsequent farm-state divergence;
   matching spend is insufficient. Do not simply add unlimited cash to raw
   requests: some recordings request more than they can afford, so that can
   create extra purchases instead of preserving recorded fills.

2. The seller override requires (day + 1) * 24 < original.size() at line 276.
   replay_states supplies the 720 recorded states. Therefore day 29 retains
   recorded sales rather than the reactive seller, even if preceding new
   sales changed its remaining stock. Measure terminal retained stock and
   missed liquidation before treating the final cash as a clean seller read.

The lightweight validation output should include: recorded versus executed
purchase/service quantities, first farm divergence, actual versus supplied
future deposits, peak/final debt, and terminal stock. The model's sold-today
counter is also updated before order-slot filtering; reconcile it to actual
sold_units if those filters bind. Existing identity tests are valuable but
do not exercise changed prices and changed stocks.

Recommendation: retain the negative/flat result as evidence of uncertainty;
keep the already-tested live baseline as the deadline default. Do not reopen
m19 as a winner because this audit found issues. Also avoid declaring the
old result's entire mechanism explained until the above drift is measured.

New dawnshare source note: src_m14or7ds defines its percentage over available
DAWN STOCK and counts pre-filter requested sales toward its h0-2 target. The
teacher statistic quoted in messages was a share of DAILY SOLD units. These
are different denominators. The new arm is a valid independent policy probe,
but it is not yet a demonstrated reproduction of teacher dawn quantities.
Report actual h0-2 units and daily sold units, not just its configured percent.
